Can Computational Reducibility Lead to Transferable Models for Graph Combinatorial Optimization?
(BA)-small graph dataset and fine-tune on the same dataset
for only 20 epochs. The model consists of a GCON back-
bone where we attach a simple MLP heads for every tasks,
and the output is fed to a task specific unsupervised loss
function (see Sec. 3.3 and Appendix A). Fine-tuning is done
by attaching a new task head with the corresponding loss
function and training for 20 epochs with either a frozen or
an unfrozen backbone. The tasks considered here are Max-
Cut, MaxClique, MDS, MIS, MVC and K-coloring with
K= 10 . Tables display the size of the subsetV′ learned for
all tasks butK-coloring, where we simply count the number
of violations.
5.1. Leave-One-Out Transfer
We begin by asking if the successful transfers observed in
Sec. 4 also apply in the multi-task learning setting. Suppose
we want to fine-tune taskTn on a backbone pretrained on
tasksT1,···,T n−1. To get efficient transfer, does it suffice
for there to exist one taskTi in the pretraining set such that
Tn is reducible toTi? To study this question, we look at MIS
and MVC when they are fine-tuned on the other task (MIS
from MVC and MVC from MIS), when they are fine-tuned
on the rest of the tasks (MaxCut, MaxClique, 10-Coloring
and MDS), and when they are fine-tuned on all tasks (rest +
other). We compare the results to training MIS and MVC
individually for 20 epochs, and show the results for a frozen
and an unfrozen backbone in Figure 2.
Unsurprisingly, we find that when we transfer from MVC to
MIS and vice-versa, we quickly converge to a good solution
(within 4-6 epochs), whereas training from scratch takes
at least 15 epochs to match the fine-tuning performance.
However, if we do not freeze the backbone, we find that the
behavior of the MIS learning curve when pretrained on all
other tasksincludingMVC behaves similarly to whenonly
pretrained on MVC, whereas when we remove MVC from
the pretraining set, the curves behave closer to the training
from scratch. Moreover, when the backbone is frozen, the
model is not able to transfer to MIS using the other tasks
if MVC is not present in the pretraining set, giving poor
results, while if MVC is present, it actually converges faster
than training from scratch. As expected, the inverse relation
also holds true when transfering to MVC while keeping or
removing MIS in the pretraining set. These results suggest
that it is sufficient to have one j∈{1,···,n−1} such
that there is an efficient reduction from Tn toTj in order
to observe rapid transfer from the pretraining set toTn that
beats the baseline in a low-resource regime, even with a
frozen backbone (thus requiring to train only a fraction of
the total number of parameters).
Now we want set up a leave-one-out transfer framework
to study if fine-tuning on a multi-task learning model pre-
trained on the five other tasks help the remaining task to
Figure 2.Transfer performance on MVC and MIS. We compare
training from scratch against frozen and unfrozen fine-tuning on
theothertask (MVC on MIS and MIS on MVC), therestof tasks
(MCut, MClique, MDS,K-coloring), andalltasks (rest + other)
forBA-smallgraphs.
Table 5.Leave-one-out fine-tuning in low-resource regime onBA-
smallgraphs (20 epochs, unfrozen backbone, 5 runs average)
TASKFROMSCRATCHFINE-TUNED
↑MAXCUT716.81±3.00722.40±1.17
↑MAXCLIQUE4.31±0.014.32±0.01
↓MDS35.57±2.4136.15±1.87
↑MIS 111.33±0.20111.56±0.10
↓MVC 141.30±0.27140.04±0.33
↓COLOR61.92±36.1124.19±9.08
learn a good solution faster than from scratch. We repeat
this experiment five times for all tasks on BA small graphs
in low-resources regime (20 epochs), and display the results
in Table 5. We find that for every task but MDS, the model
attains better performance at 20 epochs when it is fine-tuned
on the other tasks than from scratch, which provides a strong
evidence of transfer between graph CO problems. However,
the benefits of fine-tuning varies between tasks: it is most
beneficial for MaxCut andK-coloring to be fine-tuned on
other CO problems, whereas MaxClique and MDS show
little to no benefit. Therefore if our goal is to rapidly obtain
good solutions to CO problems by fine-tuning tasks on a
pretrained backbone compared to from scratch, our results
suggest that MaxCut andK-coloring are good candidates
to be fine-tuned.
5.2. Fine-Tuning on a Graph CO Backbone
In this section, we propose a pretraining set of three CO
problems and leave the remaining three tasks to be fine-
tuned for 20 epochs and compare performance to single
task learning from scratch for 20 epochs and for the full
200 epochs. From our findings in in Sec. 5.1, we assert
that having one closely related task in the pretraining set
is sufficient for good fine-tuning performance. Since we
want to manage our resources efficiently, we want to avoid
having similar tasks in the pretraining set when only one
is sufficient to learn the others by fine-tuning. Therefore,
8