=== PAGE 5 ===
Can Computational Reducibility Lead to Transferable Models for Graph Combinatorial Optimization?
straints to arrive at a valid solution. In each case, we order
the nodes by probability of being included in the solution
set (based on p) and initialize the solution setS∗ =∅ . We
then iterate over the ordered node set and addvi toS∗ only
if it does not violate the problem constraints.
As demonstrated in Karalias & Loukas (2020), this blueprint
follows the method of conditional expectation (Raghavan,
1988). However, we note that this approach does not guaran-
tee the optimal solution, especially when the GNN encoder
assigns similar high probabilities to multiple nodes that may
constitute distinct solution sets. Therefore, we employ k
seeds where each seed selects a different node to initialize
the set with (choosing the k nodes with the highest prob-
abilities as initial nodes). We construct k sets,S∗
1,...S ∗
k,
and return the largest or smallest depending on the task. We
note that while a similar approach is proposed in Wenkel
et al. (2025), their implementation constructed the k sets
sequentially, leading to dramatically increased runtimes. By
contrast, our sets are constructed in a parallelized manner,
enabling the efficient use of higherk. We give more details
about the decoders in Appendix B.
3.3. Objective Functions
As objective functions, we rely on the Ising formulations
of the CO problems, as provided in Lucas (2014) and dis-
played in Table 1. When training our network, we optimize
the probabilistic vector p rather than X∈{0,1} N . The
Ising model and equivalent quadratic unconstrained binary
optimization (QUBO) formulations have emerged as an ef-
fective framework to unify many CO problems by assigning
an energy function (namely the Hamiltonian) to every task
such that its optimal solution minimizes the total energy (Lu-
cas, 2014; Kochenberger et al., 2014; Glover et al., 2022;
Schuetz et al., 2022a). The loss functions for MIS, MDS,
MaxClique and MDS involve two termsA andB that can be
tuned additionally; the ratio ofA toB controls how strongly
to penalize constraint violations in relation to maximizing
or minimizing the size of the objective set. SettingA<B
ensures the optimal solutions are valid subsets. We note that
all six problems studied here (illustrated in Fig. 1) are well
established in relevant computer science literature, and their
approximate relaxations used to derive the loss terms in Ta-
ble 1 are becoming incresingly standard in GNN literature.
Detailed problem descriptions are provided in Appendix A.
3.4. Ablation Study on GCON Layer
To validate our use of GCON in the following studies, we
first present an ablation study comparing several GNN-
based neural solvers with identical architectures (except
the convolutional layer), as well as the performant genera-
tive flow network-based GFN model (Zhang et al., 2023) on
MVC, MaxClique and MIS. As shown in Table 2, when
paired with the energy-based loss functions, we outper-
form all deep learning baselines (with the exception of GFN
on MIS, which is very competitive), attaining particularly
strong results for MVC and MaxClique on RB-small graphs.
The best-performing GCON models also constitute our pre-
trained models for our transferability experiments in Sec. 4.
We highlight that, for the MaxClique problem on RB-small,
we substantially improve over Wenkel et al. (2025), finding
a MaxClique size of 16.92 (compared to 15.87 in Wenkel
et al. (2025)) despite the fact that they used a nearly iden-
tical architecture. This difference is attributed to our im-
proved loss function that follows the Hamiltonian: By con-
trast, Wenkel et al. (2025) follows a formulation based on
the Motzkin-Strauss theorem (Motzkin & Straus, 1965),
which – while also valid and related – uses a quadratic first
term that changes the optimization landscape, likely over-
emphasizing size maximization over the penalty term. To
verify our observations, we further tested a similar quadratic
first term for MIS (note the similarity of the MIS and Max-
Clique Hamiltonian losses in Table 1); the alternative loss
only attained 15.5 average MIS size as opposed to 18.04
with the Hamiltonian loss. These findings strongly empha-
size the importance of an appropriate loss function selection,
despite the availability of many valid formulations.
4. Pairwise Transferability
We begin this section with a brief discussion of known
polynomial reductions among three closely related CO tasks:
Maximum Independent Set (MIS), Minimum Vertex Cover
(MVC) and Maximum Clique (MaxClique).
• MIS↔ MVC:MIS and MVC are trivially reducible
as they are the complements of each other by Lemma
2.1: Solving for the MIS subset MISG ⊂V implies
MVCG =V\MIS G, and vice versa.
• MaxClique↔ MIS:Again by Lemma 2.1, the Max-
Clique of G is the MIS of the complement graph
MaxCliqueG =MIS ¯G.
• MaxClique↔ MVC:Following the statements above,
the MaxClique ofG is the complement set of the MVC
of the complement graph ¯G: MaxCliqueG =V\MVC ¯G.
4.1. MIS↔MVC
As established above, MISG and MVCG are complements,
and therefore solve each other implicitly. In our training
pipeline, we can interpret this in terms of the node probabil-
ities, where for a given nodevi, we have pMIS
i = 1−p MVC
i .
We conjecture that the graph representations learned on
MIS should also be sufficient to solve MVC, and vice versa.
Furthermore, given the linear relationship between the two,
a simple linear layer after message-passing should be able
5
=== PAGE 6 ===
Can Computational Reducibility Lead to Transferable Models for Graph Combinatorial Optimization?
to learn this function using identical representations. Our
first test is thus to pretrain a model on one task, and transfer
the representations to the other task using the pretrained
GNN backbone and resetting & training only the linear post-
message-passing layer; we expect the transferred model to
quickly recover the original pretrained model performance.
RESULTS& ANALYSIS
Our hypothesis holds true with some caveats, with the re-
sults denoted in Table 3. We test several settings, the most
straightforward of which is freezing the MIS-trained GNN
backbone and simply resetting & fine-tuning the linear out-
put layer to solve MVC, and vice versa. The linear model
converges quickly (within 5 epochs for MIS,∼50 epochs
for MVC), but does not match the baselines trained from
scratch. This is likely due to the approximate nature of our
solution, as the strict duality between the problems assumes
an exact solution. In the second setting, instead of initializ-
ing the linear output layer from scratch, we invert it, i.e., we
initialize the new linear layer by multiplying all parameters
by−1, as the inversion is maintained through the softmax
output: σ(−x) = 1−σ(x) . This provides a much better
initialization as convergence is almost immediate on both
tasks, but it does not lead to any substantial improvement on
final results – implying that the frozen GNN representations
themselves are not able to overcome the duality gap, and
thus the backbone also needs to be fine-tuned.
Finally, we verify whether fine-tuning the whole model
after inverting the output head can recover the baseline
performance. For MIS→ MVC in particular, the results are
remarkable in that all runs converge within 15 epochs, and
the resulting models outperform the baseline trained from
scratch for 300 epochs. MVC → MIS is also successful,
albeit to a lesser extent – likely because pretrained MIS
model has converged to a better minimum: The fine-tuned
model converges to a marginally worse performance than the
baseline on average, and convergence takes 100-150 epochs,
whereas the baselines were trained for 200 epochs. This
indicates that the GNNscanlearn to perform the appropriate
reduction, but rely on good initialization and fine-tuning
of the backbone to maximize performance – theoretical
equivariance of the reduction alone is not enough.
Table 3.MIS ↔ MVC transferability onRB-small. BASELINE
refers to models trained from scratch on the CO task tested on.
Other models are pretrained on the opposite task, e.g., the MIS
column evaluates models pretrained on MVC and fine-tuned on
MIS.
GNN OUT-HEAD MIS↑MVC↓
BASELINE18.12±0.11211.69±0.16
FREEZERESET+ FT 17.68±0.04212.46±0.25
FREEZEINVERT+ FT 17.69±0.05212.39±0.21
FT INVERT+ FT 18.00±0.05211.56±0.24
4.2. MIS/MVC↔MaxClique
Our experiments in 4.1 (MIS↔ MVC) implicitly use the
fact that the problem reductions considered do not alter the
graph topology. This increases transferability substantially
as the graph representations do not suffer from any distribu-
tion shift in the graph structure nor the node features, which
makes it viable to freeze the GNN backbone, and fine-tuning
only the MLP head, in order to obtain close-to-optimal re-
sults. Indeed, the learned node-level representations in this
case are sufficient, and no additional graph-level informa-
tion is needed to solve either task.
However, this advantage does not apply to transferring rep-
resentations between MaxClique and MIS/MVC: G and
the complement graph ¯G may have drastically different
structural properties and distributions despite sharing the
same node set V . For instance, RB graphs are typically
sparse, which implies that their complements are very dense.
This renders the structurally-derived node features (or any
structurally-informed PSE that may be used in their stead for
node identifiability) ineffective. Moreover, the graph con-
volutional layers will similarly suffer from this distribution
shift.
With this in mind, we aim to answer the following questions
on MIS→ MaxClique transferability, while noting that our
findings apply to MVC↔MaxClique as well:
• Exps. #4–7:Despite the shift in graph topology, how
useful are the MIS-pretrained weights by themselves in a
(i) frozen backbone, or (ii) full fine-tuning setting?
• Exps. #8–9:Assuming the node-level representations
are not sufficient, does additionalglobalmessage-passing
(using a stack of Graph Transformer (GT) layers on top
of the GNN backbone) help adapt to the distribution shift
in topology?
• Exps. #10–11:Recalling MaxCliqueG =MIS ¯G, can we
match baseline performance by implementing thetrue
reduction by fine-tuning the model to solve MIS on the
complement ¯G? To account for the distribution shift in
node features, we pretrain and fine-tune the model based
on node features derived frombothGand ¯G.
RESULTS& ANALYSIS
In Table 4, we compare our fine-tuned models with the base-
lines that comprise the first three rows: (1) GCON trained
from scratch on MaxClique, using as node features graph
statistics derived from G only and representing a typical
training setting, (2) GCON similarly trained from scratch
but node features derived from bothG and ¯G for fair compar-
ison with fine-tuning settings that use ¯G, and (3) Randomly
initialized GCON to benchmark random embedding per-
formance. The baselines are trained for up to 700 epochs,
while the frozen/fine-tuned models are trained for up to 200,
6
=== PAGE 7 ===
Can Computational Reducibility Lead to Transferable Models for Graph Combinatorial Optimization?
Table 4.Overview of MIS → MaxClique transferability experi-
ments onRB-small. First two rows represent baselines trained
from scratch. The “feats” column denotes whether graph statis-
tics from only the original graphG or also its complement ¯G are
provided as initial node features. Third row represents a randomly
initialized GCON model. Mean± standard dev for 3 runs reported.
Top 3 transfer runs are denoted withgold,silverandbronze.
# FEATSGNN STACKGT COMP? MC SIZE
1GBASELINE— FALSE 16.92±0.13
2G∥ ¯GBASELINE— FALSE 16.63±0.05
3GRANDOM— FALSE 10.71±0.14
4GFROZEN— FALSE 16.12±0.20
5GFINE-TUNED— FALSE 16.55±0.03
6G∥ ¯GFROZEN— FALSE 15.98±0.12
7G∥ ¯GFINE-TUNED— FALSE 16.63±0.03
8GFROZEN3-MHA FALSE 16.13±0.17
9G∥ ¯GFROZEN3-MHA FALSE 16.11±0.63
10G∥ ¯GFROZEN— TRUE 15.52±0.08
11G∥ ¯GFINE-TUNED— TRUE 16.82±0.04
with early stopping used.
All fine-tuning settings perform well above random, which
is an encouraging if unsurprising result. We also note that
even the worst-performing models are able to outperform
local-message-passing GNNs trained from scratch (Table 2)
and find an average maximum clique of size 16 (with the
exception of #10). These results convincingly demonstrate
that pretraining on MIS isusefulfor MaxClique even though
the underlying topology of the MaxClique-reduced-to-MIS
graphs are different. We also note that the flexibility of
GCON layers likely contributes to the transferability of
representations. Nevertheless, most fine-tuning settings fall
short of the baselines. We hereby list our main takeaways
on each question previously stated:
Freezing vs. Fine-tuning (#4–7):The aforementioned dis-
tribution shift problems limit the ceiling of the frozen-GNN-
backbone models in the absence of additional learnable
GNN layers, verifying that the MIS-trained local represen-
tations are not sufficient to predict MaxClique. Fine-tuning
fares considerably better – while not always sufficient to
match the baseline performance with only 200 epochs, #7 ex-
actly matches its corresponding baseline (#2). While more
topology-preserving reductions imply easier task transfer
(as in the MIS↔ MVC case), these experiments show that
CO tasks related via non-topology-preserving reductions
canstill provide a strong initialization, with the caveat that
fine-tuning is required to close the distribution shift.
Global message-passing (#8–9):When considering addi-
tional global message-passing (i.e., graph Transformer) we
focus on the frozen-backbone setting, since the fine-tuning
setting renders them somewhat redundant, especially consid-
ering the additional quadratic computational complexity of
the GT layers. We use three layers of multi-head attention
with three heads each. We also evaluated combining MHA
with message-passing using GraphGPS layers (Ramp´aˇsek
et al., 2022), but did not see any additional benefits.
On average, global message-passing over frozen GNN back-
bones only offers marginal improvements, and falls short of
trained baselines. However, we note high variance across
runs, with one #9 run attaining 16.75, which outperforms
the corresponding baseline (#2). This indicates that global
message-passingmayleverage the frozen MIS representa-
tions successfully to transfer to MaxClique, but na¨ıve train-
ing of the transformer layers is likely insufficient – exten-
sive fine-tuning and auxiliary structures (e.g., re-introducing
node statistics or positional encodings, at the transformer-
stack level, or deeper stacks with linear transformer layers)
are required to obtain consistent improvements.
Implementing the true reduction (#10–11):Finally, we
test the following setting: After pretraining our model to
solve MIS, in the fine-tuning phase we perform message-
passing over the complement graph ¯G instead of the original.
One can then use the MIS loss and metrics, effectively solv-
ing MIS over ¯G which is equivalent to solving MaxClique
(per the preamble of Sec. 4); note that keeping the Max-
Clique loss and metrics over the original graph is also viable
as the losses are equivalent over the complement (Table 1).
Interestingly, if the MIS-pretrained backbone is frozen (#12),
we obtain by far the worst-performing model, whereas fine-
tuning the full model instead (#13) gives us the only model
that can consistently match (and even beat) its baseline coun-
terpart within the allotted epochs. The failure of the frozen
model can likely be attributed to the distribution shift in the
graph topology; however, the learned representations clearly
form a useful initialization – fine-tuning quickly adapts the
model to the new distribution to recover the baseline perfor-
mance in less than a third of the epochs.
5. Multi-Task Transferability
We now study transferability between graph CO problems
in a pretraining-fine-tuning framework, where we learn mul-
tiple CO problems simultaneously in pretraining and use
this knowledge to transfer efficiently onto new problems by
fine-tuning for a few epochs. We first show that a task only
requires one task similar to itself in the pretraining set to
learn a solution quickly when fine-tuned. We further show
that almost all tasks benefit from fine-tuning on other tasks
compared to training from scratch, and use our observations
to partition the six tasks we consider into a pretraining set
and a fine-tuning set of three tasks each. We then evaluate
the resulting performances against single task learning base-
lines. We hope that a careful study of the interplay between
different CO problems and known reductions will yield an
appropriate pretraining set, paving the way to foundational
models for graph CO problems. For every experiment in this
section, we pretrain for 200 epochs on a Barab ´asi–Albert
7
=== PAGE 8 ===
Can Computational Reducibility Lead to Transferable Models for Graph Combinatorial Optimization?
(BA)-small graph dataset and fine-tune on the same dataset
for only 20 epochs. The model consists of a GCON back-
bone where we attach a simple MLP heads for every tasks,
and the output is fed to a task specific unsupervised loss
function (see Sec. 3.3 and Appendix A). Fine-tuning is done
by attaching a new task head with the corresponding loss
function and training for 20 epochs with either a frozen or
an unfrozen backbone. The tasks considered here are Max-
Cut, MaxClique, MDS, MIS, MVC and K-coloring with
K= 10 . Tables display the size of the subsetV′ learned for
all tasks butK-coloring, where we simply count the number
of violations.
5.1. Leave-One-Out Transfer
We begin by asking if the successful transfers observed in
Sec. 4 also apply in the multi-task learning setting. Suppose
we want to fine-tune taskTn on a backbone pretrained on
tasksT1,···,T n−1. To get efficient transfer, does it suffice
for there to exist one taskTi in the pretraining set such that
Tn is reducible toTi? To study this question, we look at MIS
and MVC when they are fine-tuned on the other task (MIS
from MVC and MVC from MIS), when they are fine-tuned
on the rest of the tasks (MaxCut, MaxClique, 10-Coloring
and MDS), and when they are fine-tuned on all tasks (rest +
other). We compare the results to training MIS and MVC
individually for 20 epochs, and show the results for a frozen
and an unfrozen backbone in Figure 2.
Unsurprisingly, we find that when we transfer from MVC to
MIS and vice-versa, we quickly converge to a good solution
(within 4-6 epochs), whereas training from scratch takes
at least 15 epochs to match the fine-tuning performance.
However, if we do not freeze the backbone, we find that the
behavior of the MIS learning curve when pretrained on all
other tasksincludingMVC behaves similarly to whenonly
pretrained on MVC, whereas when we remove MVC from
the pretraining set, the curves behave closer to the training
from scratch. Moreover, when the backbone is frozen, the
model is not able to transfer to MIS using the other tasks
if MVC is not present in the pretraining set, giving poor
results, while if MVC is present, it actually converges faster
than training from scratch. As expected, the inverse relation
also holds true when transfering to MVC while keeping or
removing MIS in the pretraining set. These results suggest
that it is sufficient to have one j∈{1,···,n−1} such
that there is an efficient reduction from Tn toTj in order
to observe rapid transfer from the pretraining set toTn that
beats the baseline in a low-resource regime, even with a
frozen backbone (thus requiring to train only a fraction of
the total number of parameters).
Now we want set up a leave-one-out transfer framework
to study if fine-tuning on a multi-task learning model pre-
trained on the five other tasks help the remaining task to
Figure 2.Transfer performance on MVC and MIS. We compare
training from scratch against frozen and unfrozen fine-tuning on
theothertask (MVC on MIS and MIS on MVC), therestof tasks
(MCut, MClique, MDS,K-coloring), andalltasks (rest + other)
forBA-smallgraphs.
Table 5.Leave-one-out fine-tuning in low-resource regime onBA-
smallgraphs (20 epochs, unfrozen backbone, 5 runs average)
TASKFROMSCRATCHFINE-TUNED
↑MAXCUT716.81±3.00722.40±1.17
↑MAXCLIQUE4.31±0.014.32±0.01
↓MDS35.57±2.4136.15±1.87
↑MIS 111.33±0.20111.56±0.10
↓MVC 141.30±0.27140.04±0.33
↓COLOR61.92±36.1124.19±9.08
learn a good solution faster than from scratch. We repeat
this experiment five times for all tasks on BA small graphs
in low-resources regime (20 epochs), and display the results
in Table 5. We find that for every task but MDS, the model
attains better performance at 20 epochs when it is fine-tuned
on the other tasks than from scratch, which provides a strong
evidence of transfer between graph CO problems. However,
the benefits of fine-tuning varies between tasks: it is most
beneficial for MaxCut andK-coloring to be fine-tuned on
other CO problems, whereas MaxClique and MDS show
little to no benefit. Therefore if our goal is to rapidly obtain
good solutions to CO problems by fine-tuning tasks on a
pretrained backbone compared to from scratch, our results
suggest that MaxCut andK-coloring are good candidates
to be fine-tuned.
5.2. Fine-Tuning on a Graph CO Backbone
In this section, we propose a pretraining set of three CO
problems and leave the remaining three tasks to be fine-
tuned for 20 epochs and compare performance to single
task learning from scratch for 20 epochs and for the full
200 epochs. From our findings in in Sec. 5.1, we assert
that having one closely related task in the pretraining set
is sufficient for good fine-tuning performance. Since we
want to manage our resources efficiently, we want to avoid
having similar tasks in the pretraining set when only one
is sufficient to learn the others by fine-tuning. Therefore,
8